README.md, before:

# Dynamic Random Sampler

A high-performance weighted random sampler with dynamic weight updates, implementing
the data structure from "Dynamic Generation of Discrete Random Variates" by
Matias, Vitter, and Ni (1993/2003).

## Features

- $O(\log^* N)$ **sampling**: Expected constant time for all practical $N$ (up to $2^{65536}$)
- $O(\log^* N)$ **updates**: Amortized expected time for weight changes
- **Dynamic operations**: Append, pop, and update weights without rebuilding
- **Numerically stable**: Handles weights spanning $10^{-300}$ to $10^{300}$
- **Python bindings**: Easy-to-use Python API via PyO3

## Installation

### Python

```bash
pip install dynamic-random-sampler
```

### From source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/DRMacIver/dynamic-random-sampler.git
cd dynamic-random-sampler
just install  # Install dependencies
just build    # Build the Rust extension
```

## Quick Start

### SamplerList (list-like interface)

A list of weights with $O(\log^* N)$ weighted random sampling. Indices are stable -
elements can only be added at the end (append) or removed from the end (pop).

```python
from dynamic_random_sampler import SamplerList

# Create sampler with weights
sampler = SamplerList([1.0, 2.0, 3.0])

# Sample an index (returns 0, 1, or 2 with probabilities 1/6, 2/6, 3/6)
index = sampler.sample()

# Access weights like a list
weight = sampler[0]     # Get weight at index 0
sampler[0] = 10.0       # Update weight at index 0

# Add and remove elements (at end only - indices stay stable)
sampler.append(5.0)     # Add weight 5.0 at end
sampler.extend([1.0, 2.0])  # Add multiple weights
sampler.pop()           # Remove and return last element

# Soft exclusion (keeps index but excludes from sampling)
sampler[2] = 0.0        # Element at index 2 won't be sampled

# Standard list operations
len(sampler)            # Number of elements
list(sampler)           # Get all weights as a list
2.0 in sampler          # Check if weight exists
sampler.clear()         # Remove all elements
```

### SamplerDict (dict-like interface)

A dictionary mapping keys to weights with $O(\log^* N)$ weighted random sampling.
Supports arbitrary string keys with full dict operations.

```python
from dynamic_random_sampler import SamplerDict

# Create empty dict (or with seed for reproducibility)
wd = SamplerDict(seed=12345)

# Set weights for keys
wd["apple"] = 1.0
wd["banana"] = 2.0
wd["cherry"] = 3.0

# Sample a random key (probability proportional to weight)
key = wd.sample()  # Returns "cherry" most often (weight 3.0)

# Dict-like access
weight = wd["apple"]    # Get weight
wd["apple"] = 5.0       # Update weight
del wd["banana"]        # Delete key

# Standard dict operations
len(wd)                 # Number of keys
"apple" in wd           # Check if key exists
wd.keys()               # List of keys
wd.values()             # List of weights
wd.items()              # List of (key, weight) tuples
wd.get("missing", 0.0)  # Get with default
wd.pop("apple")         # Remove and return weight
wd.clear()              # Remove all keys
```

## Performance

The algorithm achieves sub-logarithmic time complexity through a tree structure
where elements are partitioned by weight ranges. Key optimizations include:

- $O(1)$ **random child access**: Dual Vec+HashMap storage for rejection sampling
- **Gumbel-max trick**: Log-space sampling without normalization
- **Weight caching**: Avoid redundant log-sum-exp computations
- **Lazy propagation**: Small weight changes don't propagate through tree

### Benchmarks

| Operation | Size | Time |
|-----------|------|------|
| single_sample (uniform) | 1000 | ~198ns |
| single_sample (power_law) | 1000 | ~370ns |
| batch_1000 | 1000 | ~199μs |
| construction | 1000 | ~135μs |
| update (same range) | 1000 | ~1.8μs |
| update (cross range) | 1000 | ~750ns |
| insert | 1000 | ~5.2μs |
| delete | 1000 | ~4.1μs |

(Measured on development machine)

## Algorithm Overview

Given $N$ elements with weights $w_1, \ldots, w_N$, samples index $j$ with probability
$w_j / \sum_i w_i$.

### Key Ideas

1. **Range partitioning**: Elements grouped by weight range $R_j = [2^{j-1}, 2^j)$
2. **Tree structure**: Non-root ranges (degree $\geq 2$) become elements at next level
3. **Rejection sampling**: Within each range, accept with probability $w/2^j \geq 1/2$
4. **Log-space arithmetic**: Weights stored as $\log_2(w)$ for numerical stability

The tree height is bounded by $O(\log^* N)$, the iterated logarithm, which is $\leq 5$
for all practical $N$.

See [docs/algorithm.md](docs/algorithm.md) for detailed documentation with
mathematical notation.

## Development

### Requirements

- Rust 1.75+
- Python 3.12+
- [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) (Python package manager)
- [just](https://github.com/casey/just) (command runner)

### Commands

```bash
just install    # Install all dependencies
just build      # Build the Rust extension
just test       # Run fast tests
just test-slow  # Run slow tests (statistical validation)
just test-all   # Run all tests
just lint       # Run all linters
just format     # Format all code
just check      # Run full quality check
cargo bench     # Run benchmarks
```

### Project Structure

```
src/
  core/           # Pure Rust implementation
    mod.rs        # Module definitions, log-sum-exp
    sampler.rs    # Sampling algorithm with Gumbel-max
    range.rs      # Range data structure (O(1) random access)
    level.rs      # Level data structure
    tree.rs       # Immutable tree for sampling
    update.rs     # MutableTree with insert/delete/update
    config.rs     # Section 4 optimization configuration
    stats.rs      # Chi-squared testing
  lib.rs          # PyO3 bindings
tests/
  test_distributions.rs  # Rust statistical tests
  test_hypothesis.py     # Property-based Python tests
benches/
  sampling.rs     # Criterion benchmarks
docs/
  algorithm.md    # Detailed algorithm documentation
```

## References

Matias, Y., Vitter, J. S., & Ni, W. (2003). "Dynamic generation of discrete
random variates." *Theory of Computing Systems*, 36(4), 329-358.

Original conference version: SODA 1993.

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add quality disclaimer to README

README.md, after:

# Dynamic Random Sampler

A high-performance weighted random sampler with dynamic weight updates, implementing
the data structure from "Dynamic Generation of Discrete Random Variates" by
Matias, Vitter, and Ni (1993/2003).

## Quality Disclaimer

The majority of this code was written by Claude Code, with heavy human guidance. It has had moderate human review and been extensively tested (again, mostly by Claude). It is likely to be reasonably robust, but it is still an early release that has not seen much use in practice, so there may be problems that have not yet been discovered. If you run into any, please report them.

## Features

- $O(\log^* N)$ **sampling**: Expected constant time for all practical $N$ (up to $2^{65536}$)
- $O(\log^* N)$ **updates**: Amortized expected time for weight changes
- **Dynamic operations**: Append, pop, and update weights without rebuilding
- **Numerically stable**: Handles weights spanning $10^{-300}$ to $10^{300}$
- **Python bindings**: Easy-to-use Python API via PyO3

## Installation

### Python

```bash
pip install dynamic-random-sampler
```

### From source

```bash
git clone https://github.com/DRMacIver/dynamic-random-sampler.git
cd dynamic-random-sampler
just install  # Install dependencies
just build    # Build the Rust extension
```

## Quick Start

### SamplerList (list-like interface)

A list of weights with $O(\log^* N)$ weighted random sampling. Indices are stable -
elements can only be added at the end (append) or removed from the end (pop).

```python
from dynamic_random_sampler import SamplerList

# Create sampler with weights
sampler = SamplerList([1.0, 2.0, 3.0])

# Sample an index (returns 0, 1, or 2 with probabilities 1/6, 2/6, 3/6)
index = sampler.sample()

# Access weights like a list
weight = sampler[0]     # Get weight at index 0
sampler[0] = 10.0       # Update weight at index 0

# Add and remove elements (at end only - indices stay stable)
sampler.append(5.0)     # Add weight 5.0 at end
sampler.extend([1.0, 2.0])  # Add multiple weights
sampler.pop()           # Remove and return last element

# Soft exclusion (keeps index but excludes from sampling)
sampler[2] = 0.0        # Element at index 2 won't be sampled

# Standard list operations
len(sampler)            # Number of elements
list(sampler)           # Get all weights as a list
2.0 in sampler          # Check if weight exists
sampler.clear()         # Remove all elements
```

### SamplerDict (dict-like interface)

A dictionary mapping keys to weights with $O(\log^* N)$ weighted random sampling.
Supports arbitrary string keys with full dict operations.

```python
from dynamic_random_sampler import SamplerDict

# Create empty dict (or with seed for reproducibility)
wd = SamplerDict(seed=12345)

# Set weights for keys
wd["apple"] = 1.0
wd["banana"] = 2.0
wd["cherry"] = 3.0

# Sample a random key (probability proportional to weight)
key = wd.sample()  # Returns "cherry" most often (weight 3.0)

# Dict-like access
weight = wd["apple"]    # Get weight
wd["apple"] = 5.0       # Update weight
del wd["banana"]        # Delete key

# Standard dict operations
len(wd)                 # Number of keys
"apple" in wd           # Check if key exists
wd.keys()               # List of keys
wd.values()             # List of weights
wd.items()              # List of (key, weight) tuples
wd.get("missing", 0.0)  # Get with default
wd.pop("apple")         # Remove and return weight
wd.clear()              # Remove all keys
```

## Performance

The algorithm achieves sub-logarithmic time complexity through a tree structure
where elements are partitioned by weight ranges. Key optimizations include:

- $O(1)$ **random child access**: Dual Vec+HashMap storage for rejection sampling
- **Gumbel-max trick**: Log-space sampling without normalization
- **Weight caching**: Avoid redundant log-sum-exp computations
- **Lazy propagation**: Small weight changes don't propagate through tree

### Benchmarks

| Operation | Size | Time |
|-----------|------|------|
| single_sample (uniform) | 1000 | ~198ns |
| single_sample (power_law) | 1000 | ~370ns |
| batch_1000 | 1000 | ~199μs |
| construction | 1000 | ~135μs |
| update (same range) | 1000 | ~1.8μs |
| update (cross range) | 1000 | ~750ns |
| insert | 1000 | ~5.2μs |
| delete | 1000 | ~4.1μs |

(Measured on development machine)

## Algorithm Overview

Given $N$ elements with weights $w_1, \ldots, w_N$, samples index $j$ with probability
$w_j / \sum_i w_i$.

### Key Ideas

1. **Range partitioning**: Elements grouped by weight range $R_j = [2^{j-1}, 2^j)$
2. **Tree structure**: Non-root ranges (degree $\geq 2$) become elements at next level
3. **Rejection sampling**: Within each range, accept with probability $w/2^j \geq 1/2$
4. **Log-space arithmetic**: Weights stored as $\log_2(w)$ for numerical stability

The tree height is bounded by $O(\log^* N)$, the iterated logarithm, which is $\leq 5$
for all practical $N$.

See [docs/algorithm.md](docs/algorithm.md) for detailed documentation with
mathematical notation.

## Development

### Requirements

- Rust 1.75+
- Python 3.12+
- [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) (Python package manager)
- [just](https://github.com/casey/just) (command runner)

### Commands

```bash
just install    # Install all dependencies
just build      # Build the Rust extension
just test       # Run fast tests
just test-slow  # Run slow tests (statistical validation)
just test-all   # Run all tests
just lint       # Run all linters
just format     # Format all code
just check      # Run full quality check
cargo bench     # Run benchmarks
```

### Project Structure

```
src/
  core/           # Pure Rust implementation
    mod.rs        # Module definitions, log-sum-exp
    sampler.rs    # Sampling algorithm with Gumbel-max
    range.rs      # Range data structure (O(1) random access)
    level.rs      # Level data structure
    tree.rs       # Immutable tree for sampling
    update.rs     # MutableTree with insert/delete/update
    config.rs     # Section 4 optimization configuration
    stats.rs      # Chi-squared testing
  lib.rs          # PyO3 bindings
tests/
  test_distributions.rs  # Rust statistical tests
  test_hypothesis.py     # Property-based Python tests
benches/
  sampling.rs     # Criterion benchmarks
docs/
  algorithm.md    # Detailed algorithm documentation
```

## References

Matias, Y., Vitter, J. S., & Ni, W. (2003). "Dynamic generation of discrete
random variates." *Theory of Computing Systems*, 36(4), 329-358.

Original conference version: SODA 1993.

## License

MIT
